# ras-x86-64

## `Mnemonic` and instruction map generation

The `Mnemonic` enum containing all the x86-64 mnemonics is generated by a build
script, which uses Gregory Comer's
[x86-csv](https://github.com/GregoryComer/x86-csv). The build script also emits
`bin/map`, a serialized mapping of mnemonics to instruction encodings.

## x86 instruction encoding

Extracted from section 3.1 of the [Intel® 64 and IA-32 architectures software developer's
manual volume
2](https://software.intel.com/content/www/us/en/develop/articles/intel-sdm.html):
* `NP` - Indicates the use of `66/F2/F3` prefixes (beyond those already part
  of the instructions opcode) are not allowed with the instruction. Such use
  will either cause an invalid-opcode exception (#UD) or result in the
  encoding for a different instruction.
* `NFx` - Indicates the use of `F2/F3` prefixes (beyond those already part
  of the instructions opcode) are not allowed with the instruction. Such use
  will either cause an invalid-opcode exception (#UD) or result in the
  encoding for a different instruction.
* `REX.W` - Indicates the use of a `REX` prefix that affects operand size or
  instruction semantics. The ordering of the REX prefix and other
  optional/mandatory instruction prefixes are discussed Chapter 2. Note that
  REX prefixes that promote legacy instructions to 64-bit behavior are not
  listed explicitly in the opcode column.
* `/digit` - A digit between 0 and 7 indicates that the `ModR/M` byte of the
  instruction uses only the r/m (register or memory) operand. The reg field
  contains the digit that provides an extension to the instruction's opcode.
* `/r` - Indicates that the ModR/M byte of the instruction contains a
  register operand and an r/m operand.
* `cb`, `cw`, `cd`, `cp`, `co`, `ct` - A 1-byte (`cb`), 2-byte (`cw`),
  4-byte (`cd`), 6-byte (`cp`), 8-byte (`co`) or 10-byte (`ct`) value
  following the opcode. This value is used to specify a code offset and
  possibly a new value for the code segment register.
* `ib`, `iw`, `id`, `io` - A 1-byte (`ib`), 2-byte (`iw`), 4-byte (`id`) or
  8-byte (`io`) immediate operand to the instruction that follows the
  opcode, `ModR/M` bytes or scale-indexing bytes. The opcode determines if
  the operand is a signed value. All words, doublewords and quadwords are
  given with the low-order byte first.
* `+rb`, `+rw`, `+rd`, `+ro` - Indicated the lower 3 bits of the opcode byte
  is used to encode the register operand without a `ModR/M` byte. The
  instruction lists the corresponding hexadecimal value of the opcode byte
  with low 3 bits as `000b`. In non-64-bit mode, a register code, from 0
  through 7, is added to the hexadecimal value of the opcode byte. In 64-bit
  mode, indicates the four bit field of `REX.b` and `opcode[2:0]` field
  encodes the register operand of the instruction. `+ro` is applicable only
  in 64-bit mode. See Table `3-1` for the codes.
* `+i` - A number used in floating-point instructions when one of the
  operands is ST(i) from the FPU register stack. The number i (which can
  range from 0 to 7) is added to the hexadecimal byte given at the left of
      the plus sign to form a single opcode byte.
